about/ecosystem.md, before:

# PyMC ecosystem

## General purpose

- [Bambi](https://github.com/bambinos/bambi): BAyesian Model-Building Interface (BAMBI) in Python.
- [SunODE](https://github.com/aseyboldt/sunode): Fast ODE solver, much faster than the one that comes with PyMC.
- [pymc-learn](https://github.com/pymc-learn/pymc-learn): Custom PyMC models built on top of pymc3_models/scikit-learn API
- [fenics-pymc3](https://github.com/IvanYashchuk/fenics-pymc3): Differentiable interface to FEniCS, a library for solving partial differential equations.

## Domain specific

- [Exoplanet](https://github.com/dfm/exoplanet): a toolkit for modeling of transit and/or radial velocity observations of exoplanets and other astronomical time series.
- [NiPyMC](https://github.com/PsychoinformaticsLab/nipymc): Bayesian mixed-effects modeling of fMRI data in Python.
- [beat](https://github.com/hvasbath/beat): Bayesian Earthquake Analysis Tool.
- [cell2location](https://github.com/BayraktarLab/cell2location): Comprehensive mapping of tissue cell architecture via integrated single cell and spatial transcriptomics.

Commit message:

Curate ecosystem references
I removed references to packages that are no longer maintained, or no longer use PyMC.

Added links to actively maintained projects, some of which are maintained by core devs.

about/ecosystem.md, after:

# PyMC ecosystem

## General purpose

- [Bambi](https://github.com/bambinos/bambi): BAyesian Model-Building Interface (BAMBI) in Python.
- [calibr8](https://github.com/JuBiotech/calibr8): A toolbox for constructing detailed observation models to be used as likelihoods in PyMC.
- [gumbi](https://github.com/JohnGoertz/Gumbi): A high-level interface for building GP models.
- [SunODE](https://github.com/aseyboldt/sunode): Fast ODE solver, much faster than the one that comes with PyMC.
- [pymc-learn](https://github.com/pymc-learn/pymc-learn): Custom PyMC models built on top of pymc3_models/scikit-learn API

## Domain specific

- [Exoplanet](https://github.com/dfm/exoplanet): a toolkit for modeling of transit and/or radial velocity observations of exoplanets and other astronomical time series.
- [beat](https://github.com/hvasbath/beat): Bayesian Earthquake Analysis Tool.
- [CasualPy](https://github.com/pymc-labs/CausalPy): A package focussing on causal inference in quasi-experimental settings.
