blog/sprint_testimonial.md, before:

(sprint_testimonial)=
# Participating in the PyMC-Data Umbrella sprint: Interview with Sandra Meneses

:::{post} Apr 7, 2022
:tags: community, sprint, contributing
:category: testimonial
:author: Sandra Meneses, Data Umbrella
:::

![Image with a picture of Sandra Meneses, the PyMC and Data Umbrella logos
and the text "Open source contribution to PyMC"](https://blog.dataumbrella.org/images/blogs/sandra_pymc.png)

1. **Tell us a little bit about yourself.**

I am originally from Colombia and I have been living in Berlin for the past 6 years. I moved here because I wanted to be a data scientist. I had experience working with databases and a sound knowledge about Statistics, as my major was in Industrial Engineering, therefore, I saw this as the natural path for me. I finished my masters in Data Science in 2018 and I have been working in Machine Learning since then. Initially, I worked with NLP, my last project (reciprocal recommenders) involved Graph Neural Networks, so now I am into graphs. I love what I do, it makes me happy knowing people are using what I help to build.

1. **How did you first become involved in open source? In what ways? What has been your experience contributing to open source prior to the Data Umbrella PyMC Sprint?**

I have been trying to contribute to different projects, but it’s not always easy. Your questions or comments are not answered and you feel frustrated. I have got some small PRs merged in some projects which gave me a lot of satisfaction. It feels good to know that a piece of your code will be used by thousands, if not millions.

1. **How did you learn of the Data Umbrella PyMC sprint and what inspired you to attend?**

I joined the sprint because I have heard recently about Data Umbrella and I really liked the concept, I checked their website and I found the PyMC sprint. I haven’t used PyMC much before the sprint. I only tried it once a year ago while I was reading the Statistical Rethinking book, but I have never used the library for a real project. That’s the value the Data Umbrella sprints bring, you don’t need to know the code base of a project to participate and they carefully planned different webinars to bring you up to speed. Apart from that, the social component is very appealing; when I tried to contribute before, I was alone in the process. In a Data Umbrella sprint, there are not only volunteers to help you, but also other people like you wanting to contribute and experiencing similar doubts.

Read the full article here:
[Interview with Sandra Meneses: Contributing to PyMC](https://blog.dataumbrella.org/sandra-sprints), April 2022

Commit message:

customize excerpt of sprint testimonial

blog/sprint_testimonial.md, after:

(sprint_testimonial)=
# Participating in the PyMC-Data Umbrella sprint: Interview with Sandra Meneses

:::{post} Apr 7, 2022
:tags: community, sprint, contributing
:category: testimonial
:author: Sandra Meneses, Data Umbrella
:image: 0
:exclude:

Read about the recent PyMC-Data Umbrella sprint in this interview with
Sandra Meneses, one of the participants who submitted a PR
:::

![Image with a picture of Sandra Meneses, the PyMC and Data Umbrella logos
and the text "Open source contribution to PyMC"](https://blog.dataumbrella.org/images/blogs/sandra_pymc.png)

1. **Tell us a little bit about yourself.**

I am originally from Colombia and I have been living in Berlin for the past 6 years. I moved here because I wanted to be a data scientist. I had experience working with databases and a sound knowledge about Statistics, as my major was in Industrial Engineering, therefore, I saw this as the natural path for me. I finished my masters in Data Science in 2018 and I have been working in Machine Learning since then. Initially, I worked with NLP, my last project (reciprocal recommenders) involved Graph Neural Networks, so now I am into graphs. I love what I do, it makes me happy knowing people are using what I help to build.

1. **How did you first become involved in open source? In what ways? What has been your experience contributing to open source prior to the Data Umbrella PyMC Sprint?**

I have been trying to contribute to different projects, but it’s not always easy. Your questions or comments are not answered and you feel frustrated. I have got some small PRs merged in some projects which gave me a lot of satisfaction. It feels good to know that a piece of your code will be used by thousands, if not millions.

1. **How did you learn of the Data Umbrella PyMC sprint and what inspired you to attend?**

I joined the sprint because I have heard recently about Data Umbrella and I really liked the concept, I checked their website and I found the PyMC sprint. I haven’t used PyMC much before the sprint. I only tried it once a year ago while I was reading the Statistical Rethinking book, but I have never used the library for a real project. That’s the value the Data Umbrella sprints bring, you don’t need to know the code base of a project to participate and they carefully planned different webinars to bring you up to speed. Apart from that, the social component is very appealing; when I tried to contribute before, I was alone in the process. In a Data Umbrella sprint, there are not only volunteers to help you, but also other people like you wanting to contribute and experiencing similar doubts.

Read the full article here:
[Interview with Sandra Meneses: Contributing to PyMC](https://blog.dataumbrella.org/sandra-sprints), April 2022
