community/index.md, before:

(community)=
# Community

## Discourse

The [PyMC Discourse Forum](https://discourse.pymc.io/) is a great place to ask general questions about Bayesian statistics, or more specific ones about PyMC usage.

:::{tip}
Discourse is the best place to interact with the PyMC community and its team
:::

## Conferences

The PyMC community organizes [PyMCon](https://pymcon.com/), whose last edition was in [2020](https://pymc-devs.github.io/pymcon/). Follow us on any or all platforms for updates: Discourse, LinkedIn, YouTube and Twitter. Our official hashtag is #pymcon.

PyMC talks have been given at a number of conferences, including [PyCon](https://us.pycon.org/),
[PyData](https://pydata.org/events/), and [ODSC](https://odsc.com/) events.

## Twitter

You can also follow us on Twitter at [@pymc_devs](https://twitter.com/pymc_devs)

## Governance

Learn how the PyMC project is governed and how to become a member of PyMC [here](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md).

## Code of Conduct

In order to foster a welcoming environment, participation in our project and community is guided by the {ref}`code_of_conduct`.

:::{toctree}
:hidden:

../blog
calendar
code_of_conduct
:::

:::{toctree}
:caption: Discourse resources
:hidden:

how_to_ask_on_discourse
:::

Commit message:

Added Swags section & updates socials section

community/index.md, after:

(community)=
# Community

## Discourse

The [PyMC Discourse Forum](https://discourse.pymc.io/) is a great place to ask general questions about Bayesian statistics, or more specific ones about PyMC usage.

:::{tip}
Discourse is the best place to interact with the PyMC community and its team
:::

## Conferences

The PyMC community organizes [PyMCon](https://pymcon.com/), whose last edition was in [2020](https://pymc-devs.github.io/pymcon/). Follow us on any or all platforms for updates: Discourse, LinkedIn, YouTube and Twitter. Our official hashtag is #pymcon.

PyMC talks have been given at a number of conferences, including [PyCon](https://us.pycon.org/),
[PyData](https://pydata.org/events/), and [ODSC](https://odsc.com/) events.

## Swags

To purchase PyMC official swags feel free to check out the [Merch Shop](https://numfocus.myspreadshop.com/pymc+official+logo?idea=61f03c1df33f941d0307b965)

## Social Media

Twitter - You can follow us on Twitter at [@pymc_devs](https://twitter.com/pymc_devs)

YouTube - Check out our latest videos at [@pymc-devs](https://www.youtube.com/@pymc-devs)

LinkedIn - You can follow us on LinkedIn at [@pymc](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pymc/)

Meetup - Check out our upcoming Online Meetups at [@pymc-online-meetup](https://www.meetup.com/pymc-online-meetup/)

Mastodon - Also don't forget to check us on Mastodon at [@pymc](https://bayes.club/@pymc)

## Governance

Learn how the PyMC project is governed and how to become a member of PyMC [here](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md).

## Code of Conduct

In order to foster a welcoming environment, participation in our project and community is guided by the {ref}`code_of_conduct`.

:::{toctree}
:hidden:

../blog
calendar
code_of_conduct
:::

:::{toctree}
:caption: Discourse resources
:hidden:

how_to_ask_on_discourse
:::
